---
title: My experience with 10-days Vipassana course
layout: post
description: ...
nav-menu: true
image: assets/images/vip.jpeg
---

Well, it started three years ago when my brother, having returned from one of the 10-day courses, kept going on and on about how impressive and effective this particular meditation technique felt to him. It was as if he had stumbled upon certain new revelation about his own self and the world in the course of 10 days. It was amusing but I, having grown into a hardcore skeptic adult, upon hearing such lavish praises assumed it to be one of those myriads of meditation techniques which sure does impart forthwith peace and solace, but that wears down pretty quickly too; analogous to those drugs that give you a transitory high. Also, even though by deduction I regard meditation in itself to be a practice to improve focus, instinctively I have associated it to religious practices, and I tend to stay away from anything “religious". Nevertheless, due to my assumptions and presumptions and lack of willingness to try such strict discipline for 10 days, I didn’t even entertain the idea of giving it a try.
<br />
After one year my mother went to this course. It was then that it drew upon me that maybe I should also think about it. The main reason being that I observed noticeable changes in my mom’s demeanour after she came back. She appeared to be in a more stable state of mind. Then I realised that my brother, since attending the retreat, had been in a better shape too. That’s when I allowed myself the thought that this technique might be more than a fleeting manipulation, maybe a longer mind manipulation or something actually logical and real. Still it seemed too much of a commitment for me, leading such a hard ascetic life for 10 days in a dhamma centre, totally disconnected from the outside world. My inertia and lack of will-power got better of me again and I kept on procrastinating.
After a period of an year or so, driven by confusion and perplexities in life, I thought that may be my mind needs a shock or respite or something else to get additional insights and perspective. I signed up for this course which was going to be conducted in Bodh Gaya in June. It was a hasty decision to sign up for the course in such a short notice, on top of that I didn’t take into account that the weather in June is sweltering in Bodh Gaya. But then I had made a choice and I wanted to see it through, also as a challenge to sail against my weak willpower and impulsive tendencies.
I had an idea of what those 10-days entail but couldn’t discern how hard it could be. I reached there the day before the start of the course and observed different levels of excitement and enthusiasm in different people. I, being true to my skeptic nature, had no logical expectation and excitement but nevertheless I was curious about it. Next day it started, and oh my goodness, it was heart-wrenching arduous task to sit for hours without any back support among horde of people in pervasive heat and perspiration, and the recorded voice of Mr S. N. Goenka irritated me to no bounds at times. I could barely keep my cool under those circumstances. It was hard, excruciatingly hard. Anyway the first day got over and then there was a discourse in the evening. That discourse was what brought me some strength to persevere. Since childhood, I have heard a lot of discourse, and in all of those discourses I felt a common theme of didacticism which is based on some specific religion's pretexts. But this was the most logical discourse that I had ever heard, no blind idealism or indoctrination. It is not just knowing that lying is bad, but rather why is it bad? What is the logic behind it? And the logic wasn’t based on the teaching of some spiritual guru or taken from some holy book, but it was based on laws of nature and the experience of self.
<br />
The days never got easier though. To sit for hours with my eyes closed, and additionally to try to tame my impulsive tendencies so that I can focus well was a mammoth task. The technique as it progresses requires more focus and hard work and perseverance. Had I not had any understanding of why I was putting myself through that agony, I don’t think I would have chosen to endure that. As the days passed on, the discomfort to maintain the posture reduced, but my mind, conditioned in a long haul to have its impulses gratified, was far from getting tamed into submission. After a long and tiring day of meditation, many a times I counted the days or tried to fabricate some good future scenarios in my imagination to cope with the burden of the remaining demanding days. However, at times when my meditation hours were good, I felt satisfied and thankful. Moreover, because one has to observe noble silence (that is no communication through voice or gestures) and spend most of the time trying to meditate by observing the body sensations occurring at the moment, one gets more aware and more in touch with deep complexes within himself/herself. These strong complexes, which could be fear or some impactful memories or regret or insecurity etc., are subterranean since they are buried deep inside, hence it is difficult to discern their expression in our day to day distracted and chaotic life; but they do impact our choices and life course insidiously. I personally think that it is worthwhile that they surface when they do, this way one can face and deal with them.
<br />
The technique in practice consists of three parts: Sila, Samadhi and Panna. As part of Sila, one needs to agree to follow five precepts for the duration of the course: no killing, no stealing, no sexual misconduct, no telling lies and no drug use. As part of Samadhi, one needs to train the mind by following Anapana meditation where in one tries to concentrate on the natural respiration and the sensations that accompanies the breath on the nose and the surrounding areas. It helps to make mind more aware and focussed. Panna is about being aware of the sensations in the body and, by identifying the fact that each and every sensation is temporary, to merely observe them without giving in to the indulgence. It is practised by observing the sensations (be it cramping legs due to hours of sitting, or trickling perspiration, or an itch, anything as such) and learning, or rather training to be aware and equanimous. One of insights that I got by following the Vipassana technique for 10 days is that any event happening in our vicinity, be it getting praised or abused by someone, or feeling very cold, or dealing with frustrating traffic, or eating savoury food, or spending time on a beach in Goa 😉 etc., any event is sensed by the body through the sensory organs; after the conscious mind discerns the event, thereby evaluating it as good or bad or boring or exciting etc., the subconscious mind reacts to it causing bodily changes, hormonal or instigating certain part of the brain to feel happy or sad or angry or any sensation as such. This reaction by the subconscious mind is one of the main reasons of trouble and tribulations in our life. One of the aims of Vipassana technique, imo, is to train one’s mind to take stock of the present, so that when subconscious mind reacts to an event, one can be aware of it and let the reaction pass, keeping in mind that every sensation, i,e. good or bad, is temporary. Taking an example, if someone abuses me, my reaction will be to be indignant. If my mind is aware that I am feeling angry, then by isolating the sensation and by focussing on just observing it, keeping in mind that this sensation will get over sooner or later, I will not be giving in to that emotion. This is one way to try to train the subconscious mind to not to react blindly and impulsively. I am pretty sure I have just scratched the surface in terms of the understanding and the impact of this technique in those 10-days. There is much more to it, and it isn’t something magical, but rather requires hard work and perseverance to follow it regularly and steadily.
<br />
It was a roller coaster ride for 10 days. But I am glad that I came across it. I feel that this technique is one of the most needed retreat and solace in our fast and chaotic life. I think that most people are afflicted by some mental problems (anger, stress or envy or anguish or obsession etc.) in varying intensities, and that most of our problems are because of these issues. I don’t understand why is there so much stigma around it. There are two extremes to mental state, one end is where someone is in perpetual state of bliss and peace, and the other end where someone is mentally disturbed in every way. I haven’t known anyone who belongs to either of the extremes, I think most people’s mental state lie somewhere in between these extremes. In my understanding, one can improve his/her mental state by practicing this technique regularly, thereby leading to a better mind and a better life. One of the most noteworthy thing that I came across in the course was the exceptionally rational and open-minded explanation of the technique given by Mr S. N. Goenka. As per my understanding and experience, I find this technique to be a way to bring in more stability and peace to the mind, and to enable it to deal with the complexities of life in a better way.