---
title: My take on the book 'In Cold Blood' 
layout: post
nav-menu: true
image: assets/images/incoldblood.jpg
---

It was my first novel of this kind. This kind, meaning - literary journalism on real-life events. Over the years, this book has been quite heavily recommended by many people, but I never looked into properly and assumed that it is just another crime novel based remotely on some real-life event, you know! Something full of suspense and spices. However, some time back while selecting a book to read I was going through my collection of to-read list, and there I saw this book again. The same routine ensued, I went and read the description of this book followed by some of the reviews.  This time I finally gave in and decided that let me get over this book (let’s see why this book might be so well recommended). Well, I don’t think that my memory is full proof, so I fancy that this is what happened. When I started reading this book and was in a few pages, I started getting enchanted by the sensation that I was reading about real-life people. This is alluring to have been imagining the characters of the book in real-life because this time they were real.
<br />
<br />
Aside: Generally when I read something, I picture characters and the scenarios happening in my imagination to immerse myself deeply into that world, but in this case, it was like looking back into history. This makes me wonder that is this feeling also present when reading history books or autobiography? Well. I don’t recall any autobiography (book, not article or a small piece) that I have read. I don’t think so, I can’t put my fingers exactly as to why, but this seemed more charming, if I may. I will try to put my fingers on properly some other time. 
<br />
<br />
Okay, coming back and moving on. So, I was getting interested in it. And maybe my interest in the characters and the act also was incensed because I knew something ominous was coming.  It was like playing god, looking at people’s lives from above. It was engrossing, but I was totally confounded when I started reading about the perpetrators(of murder). How they carried their day to day life, and with what an attitude. It was shocking in a crude sense. What was shocking, you may ask? Such rude disregard for peoples' miseries was so natural to them. Both were cold-hearted when it came to others. They only cared about themselves, to make their life easier, whatever the cost for others maybe. Now, this lack of the most common-sense empathy confuses me. Why and how is it even possible? If I am very cold and I snatch/steal someone else's blanket then  I would know that now that person will feel the same bitterness of cold that I was feeling till now. It seems obvious that you caused some harm to the other person. It seemed to me that these perpetrators either were too hardened even to realize such a thing consciously, or they realized it but didn’t care a whit. But why would people not care? What is the sign of not caring? Not repeating such an act that might harm others or not being visibly upset? Well, they definitely did repeat such acts, and regarding the latter, I’m not sure, it didn’t seem so in the book. Anyway, let’s assume that they did not care, then why wouldn’t one care? According to my limited perspective, I have only one answer to it. They are so bitter and hurt, often and again, that they stop giving two whits about other’s feelings. Too much trauma or hurt or abuse might impact a person to such an extent as to distort their psychology and perspective. Distort as in not keeping with the tenets of the society to have empathy.
<br />
<br />
Aside: I wonder why some of these intense criminals feel exhilaration when committing inhuman acts. One hypothesis that I can come up with is that they have severely repressed animalistic instincts (repressed because of trauma or abuse), and that finds a way out when they act instinctively (like an animal). For whatever reason, they might not have enough empathy to care about people as compared to the relief/pleasure that they feel when they could vent out their repressed emotions. Why would anyone have repressed animalistic instincts? I don’t know. I need to think about it. 
<br />
<br />
Coming back about those criminals. I felt that Perry’s world view was heavily distorted. He had a sharp mind, but distorted psychology. How could it be? It could just mean that his life experiences were persuasive enough to shape his mind like that. What a shame and injustice! And the other guy, Richard, was just a SOB. He seemed to have a normal decent childhood, I don’t find anything in his background that might have traumatized him. He seems just an evil person who has never been taught enough regard for other people’s feelings. I wonder how can anyone turn out to be like that when his parents seemed like quite decent people. Maybe they didn’t care enough that he was lacking empathy or such. And with no-one to correct his behavior, he continued with something which might have seemed pleasurable for him. He mentions that he is not a killer(like other inmates). Why would he say so? Or why would he feel like that? May be simply because he lacked the courage to kill because in his environment that was still a very cruel act to perform. I don’t think that he cared about people getting killed, but he just didn’t have it in him to kill someone because of the rawness of the act. That doesn’t mean that he had any more empathy than Perry did(maybe even less).
<br />
<br />
Aside: That brings me to a great point. Physical cruelty through heinous acts as compared to subjecting the mind to cruelty through disparaging or manipulative behavior. I can be very cruel and abusive towards anyone(say, a waiter) and no-one would think that I am doing any real damage. People would think that I am a bad person, but they won’t think that I am committing a crime. But if I physically impact that person by breaking their leg then I am committing a minor crime, and if I kill someone then I have committed a horrific crime. So as we can see, it depends on the long-term impact of the behavior(physical or mental). But my point is that that there are a lot of mental abuses, harassment, and manipulation that might not even appear harming, but they can impact the victim badly. Such acts might cause long term mental anguish, mental health problems, and can very well lead to a life full of misery because they can influence the mental state badly. But because it can’t be so viscerally seen/observed/sensed hence they are not given much importance.
<br />
<br />
All in all, it was an amazing piece of literature for me. It somehow provided me a glimpse into the psyche of people who committed that horrific crime. It was sad and captivating at the same time.